---
title: "How asking for a traffic challan might benefit you."
description: "My experience with a traffic policeman and how it taught me a neat trick"
date: "2024-07-13"
tags: ["personal", "life", "advice", "culture"]
---

You know those last five seconds of a green light? The ones where the guy in
front of you suddenly has to stop for a bit but just enough so that you can't
escape? Yeah, that one.

Yesterday when returning from the office I faced a similar situation but I had
already crossed the white line and I could either move forward or stop in the
middle of the road. I chose the former and the traffic policeman chose me. He
motioned me to the side and asked for my license. I handed it over. Obviously,
since this was an Indian Traffic policeman I was mentally prepared to haggle
over the fine paid so as he asked me to get out of the car, I started talking
of how I was in a hurry and how I was sorry and how I would never do it again.

He listened to me and then asked me to pay the fine. I asked him how much and
he said 3000 rupees. This caught me by surprise because red light violations,
even minor ones like mine should not have that much of a fine. I asked him to
show me the fine/challan book and he showed me an image from his phone's
gallery. It said 3000 for _Dangerous Driving (Wrong side driving and Overtaking
in no overtake zone)_. It all made sense to me now. This was a scare tactic to
get some bribes from citizens who were either too scared or in a hurry. Lucky
for me, I had all the time in the world. So I agreed to the fine and asked him
to write me a challan. He was taken aback and told me to meet the _saheb_. I
met his superior who asked me the same standard questions - Where do you live?
What do you do? Where are you coming from? You sure you want to pay the 3000
rupee Challan? I answered all his questions and said yes to the challan.

He then took out his phone, opened some government app and clicked a photo of
my car. He then verified my registration details, tapped repeatedly on his
phone and hurridly asked me to leave. I was confused. I asked him about the
challan and he said that he had already sent it to my address. I was still
confused. I asked him about the 3000 rupees and he said that I could pay it
online. And so, the honest citizen left in his car. The honest citizen also got
an SMS a few minutes later. It was for a 500 rupee red light violation.

So people, if you ever get caught by a traffic policeman and he asks you to pay
whatever amount, ask for a challan if you think that amount is not what you
should actually be paying.

